Docs: Add Building a CLI Application How to (#1958)
beeware/briefcase: docs/how-to/cli-apps.rst

=========================================
Building your Console App with Briefcase
=========================================

Overview
--------

This guide explains the key differences when creating a **console application**
using Briefcase, as opposed to a GUI-based app. It assumes you are already familiar
with the basics of Briefcase and have completed the
`BeeWare Tutorial <https://docs.beeware.org/en/latest/tutorial/tutorial-0.html>`_.

We'll cover:

1. How selecting "Console" changes your project configuration
2. The ``console_app`` flag in ``pyproject.toml``
3. How Briefcase handles command-line arguments
4. Operational differences in how console apps run and display output
5. Packaging differences specific to console apps (e.g., .pkg bundles on macOS)

Creating a Console App
-----------------------

Start by generating a new Briefcase project with:

.. code-block:: console

    $ briefcase new

> When prompted to select a GUI framework, enter ``4`` to choose **Console**.

Reviewer: This won't necessarily be option (4) - it might be a different value depending on the plugins that are installed.

> This changes how Briefcase structures the app and configures the project.

Reviewer: "structures the app" suggests that the layout of the project will be different - which it won't be. The only thing that changes is the code in `app.py` and the extra config setting.
```suggestion
This changes the code that Briefcase generates for the new app, and the configuration for the new project.
```

The most important change is that your ``pyproject.toml`` will include:

.. code-block:: toml

    console_app = true

This flag informs Briefcase to treat the app as a terminal-based (non-GUI) application.
Console apps print to the terminal directly, unlike GUI apps which log to the system
console or display windows.

Inspecting the File Structure
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> Your generated project will have a layout similar to:

Reviewer: Only if your app name is `hello-cli` :-) - it would be worth being explicit that this layout is for an app with a formal name of `Hello CLI`, and an app name of `hello-cli`.

.. code-block:: text

    hello-cli/
    ├── pyproject.toml
    ├── src/
    │   └── hello_cli/
    │       ├── __main__.py
    │       └── app.py
    └── ...

Note the ``app.py`` file contains a simple ``print("Hello, World.")`` statement by default.

Running the App with Briefcase
------------------------------

Briefcase provides two ways to run your app: ``dev`` mode and ``run`` mode.
You can pass command-line arguments to your app in both cases using ``--`` followed

> by your arguments.

Reviewer: This is the right level of detail - but there's a chicken-and-egg issue here. As generated, the output of the app won't say "Hello John" until the argparse stuff is in place.

I'd suggest moving this section to *after* the discussion about handling command line arguments, allowing the example of command line usage to be merged into this section.

.. code-block:: console

    $ briefcase run -- John
    ===========================================================================
    Hello, John!

This is a key difference from GUI apps, which are usually launched without passing
arguments and display a graphical window.

Handling Command-line Arguments
-------------------------------

You can use any standard Python tool to parse CLI arguments. Here's a simple example
using :any:`argparse`:

.. code-block:: python

    import argparse

    def main():
        parser = argparse.ArgumentParser(description="A simple CLI app.")
        parser.add_argument("name", help="Your name")
        args = parser.parse_args()

        print(f"Hello, {args.name}!")

Update your ``app.py`` file with this logic. You can now pass a name when running the app:

.. code-block:: console

    $ briefcase dev -- John
    ===========================================================================
    Hello, John!

Packaging and Distribution
---------------------------

Once you've tested your app, you can package it for distribution using:

.. code-block:: console

    $ briefcase create
    $ briefcase build
    $ briefcase package

> For **macOS**, console apps are packaged as ``.pkg`` files, rather than the ``.app``
> bundles used for GUI apps. This is another major distinction.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On **macOS**, console apps *must* be packaged as ``.pkg`` files, rather than the
``.app`` or ``.dmg`` bundles used for GUI apps. This is required to install a
entry on the user's path so that the app can be executed from the command line.
```

.. code-block:: console

    $ briefcase package --adhoc-sign
    ...
    [hello-cli] Packaged dist/Hello CLI-0.0.1.pkg

> This ``.pkg`` file installs the app globally, and it can run from the terminal:

Reviewer: It would be worth noting that the executable name is the app name, not the formal name. This is implied by the `hello-cli` example, but it's worth being explicit (and using `hello-cli` as an example).

.. code-block:: console

    $ hello-cli John
    Hello, John!

On **Linux**, you'll get a ``.deb`` package, and on **Windows**, a ``.msi`` installer.

Console App Behavior Summary
----------------------------

Key differences from GUI apps include:

- **Project structure** includes ``console_app = true`` in ``pyproject.toml``
- **Apps are executed in the terminal**, and print directly to stdout
- **Arguments are passed using** ``-- ARGS ...`` when using ``briefcase dev`` and ``briefcase run``
- **No GUI framework or windowing system** is used or bundled
- **macOS packaging uses ``.pkg`` format**, rather than GUI `.app` bundles

What's next?
------------

Now that you've built a simple console app with Briefcase, you can use these
principles to build more complex CLI tools or integrate other libraries like
`Click <https://click.palletsprojects.com/>`_, `Typer <https://typer.tiangolo.com/>`_,

> or any other Python CLI framework.

Reviewer: It might also be worth mentioning curses and Textual and here, as a "GUI but in text mode" options.

==========================================
Building a CLI application with Briefcase
==========================================

Overview
---------

> In this tutorial, you'll learn how to build and package a Command Line Interface (CLI) application for distribution on Windows, macOS, and Linux using Briefcase.

Author: moved to tutorials

Prerequisites
-------------

Before you start, you'll need to have the following installed on your computer:

* Python 3.8 or later
* Briefcase

> * A code editor

Author: Done

For more information on installing Briefcase, see the `BeeWare Tutorial <https://docs.beeware.org/en/latest/tutorial/tutorial-0.html>`_.

Bootstrap a new project
------------------------

Let's start our first Briefcase CLI project!

> We're going to use the Briefcase ``new`` command to create an application called **Hello World**.

Author: used "Hello CLI"

The only thing that we need to change is the GUI framework.
Since we're building a CLI application, we'll select the **Console** GUI framework.
Run the following from your command prompt:

.. tabs::

  .. group-tab:: macOS

    .. code-block:: console

      (venv) $ briefcase new

>       Let's build a new Briefcase app!

Author: Done

      ===========================================================================

  .. group-tab:: Linux

    .. code-block:: console

      (venv) $ cd helloworld
      (venv) $ briefcase dev

      [hello-world] Installing requirements...
      ...

      [helloworld] Starting in dev mode...
      ===========================================================================
      Hello, World.
      ===========================================================================

  .. group-tab:: Windows

    .. code-block:: doscon

      (venv) C:\...>cd helloworld
      (venv) C:\...>briefcase dev

      [hello-world] Installing requirements...
      ...

      [helloworld] Starting in dev mode...
      ===========================================================================
      Hello, World.
      ===========================================================================

The application will start in the terminal window. You should see a message
that says "Hello, World.".

Now you are ready to start building your CLI application!

Making it interesting
----------------------

Right now the ``app.py`` file contains a simple ``print`` statement that prints "Hello, World.".

> Let's use ``argparse`` to make it more interesting.

Author: I made all the lines shorter than 88 character

> Let's use ``argparse`` to make it more interesting.

Author: Done

  .. group-tab:: Windows

    .. code-block:: doscon

      (venv) C:\...>briefcase dev

When you run the application, you should see the following output:

.. code-block:: console

    [helloworld] Starting in dev mode...
    ===========================================================================
    usage: helloworld [options] name
    helloworld: error: the following arguments are required: name

To pass arguments to the application, we will use the the following briefcase command  ``-- ARGS ...``
Let's run the application again, this time with a name:

.. tabs::

  .. group-tab:: macOS

    .. code-block:: console

      (venv) $ briefcase dev -- John

  .. group-tab:: Linux

    .. code-block:: console

      (venv) $ briefcase dev -- John

  .. group-tab:: Windows

    .. code-block:: doscon

      (venv) C:\...>briefcase dev -- John

Now you should see the following output:

.. code-block:: console

    [helloworld] Starting in dev mode...
    ===========================================================================
    Hello, John!

Congratulations! You've just built a simple command line application using Briefcase.

Next steps
----------

> So far we have been running the application in developer mode. To distribute the application, you will need to package it for distribution.

Author: sure, I will add the packaging steps
